What does it mean to be a human being in the digital age? How are those classic existential questions about our finitude and the afterlife, about time, space, ‘meaning’, selfhood and sociality, negotiated and understood in cultures of connectivity? Our communication culture, as an existential terrain, offers new spaces for exploring the profundity of life, but at the same time raises new existential predicaments and vulnerabilities.
This project examines the basic issues and big questions of our digital existence. With a particular focus on death, as the key existential given, it interrogates how we should conceive of our media ontology when digitalization now pervades our entire material lifeworld and the human condition.
Drawing on existential philosophy and combining approaches from death studies, memory studies and the field of media, religion and culture we are studying posthumous memory work, mourning online, the digital afterlife, after death communication, trolling and blogging about terminal illness. Focusing mainly on Sweden, we are also analyzing developments in the Global North, in particular in the UK, USA, Finland and Russia.
The research programme constitutes a national resource centre for the study of digital media and existential issues. In our international research network DIGMEX we are organizing a seminar series, workshops on digital media ethics and conferences. The programme collaborates closely with our international advisory board and affiliated team of researchers. We are also working with a reference group of stakeholders, state authorities and NGOs.

Amanda Lagerkvist is Associate Professor of media and communication studies, Wallenberg Academy Fellow and head of the research programme. Exploring digital vulnerabilities and the quest for ‘existential security’ in the digital age, she works in the fields of media philosophy and media memory studies analyzing how we remember the dead online and the management of the digital afterlife.

Michael Westerlund, research fellow and PhD in media and communication studies, is working on the digital publicness of bereavement with a special focus on internet and suicide.

Kristina Stenström holds a PhD in media and communication studies. Research interests revolve around transmedia environments, corporeality and the bridges in between.

Katya Linden, PhD student in media and communication studies, is working on a doctoral dissertation on death online in contemporary Russia.

Yvonne Andersson holds a PhD in journalism studies, she made a research in health communication with self-tracking devices and coping with crisis in blogging about terminal illness.

Anna Haverinen, digital anthropologist, is affiliated with the programme. She holds a PhD in digital culture and made a research on trolling and cyber bullying in online games and virtual mourning environments.

Timothy Hutchings, postdoctoral fellow, holds a PhD in the sociology of religion. He is studying online mourning practices and communication with the dead in a cross-cultural perspective.

Digital Existence: Ontology, Ethics and Transcendence in Digital Culture advances debates on digital culture and digital religion in two complementary ways. First, by focalizing the themes ‘ontology,’ ‘ethics’ and ‘transcendence,’ it builds on insights from research on digital religion in order to reframe the field and pursue an existential media analysis that further pushes beyond the mandatory focus in mainstream media studies on the social, cultural, political and economic dimensions of digitalization. Second, the collection also implies a broadening of the scope of the debate in the field of media, religion and culture – and digital religion in particular – beyond ‘religion,’ to include the wider existential dimensions of digital media. It is the first volume on our digital existence in the budding field of existential media studies.

Table of Contents
Foreword

John Durham Peters

　

Digital Existence: An Introduction

Amanda Lagerkvist

　

PART I: Media Ontologies

1 Irremediability: On the Very Concept of Digital Ontology

Justin Clemens and Adam Nash

2 Umwelt and Individuation: Digital Signals and Technical Being

Jonas Andersson Schwarz

3 Thrownness, Vulnerability, Care: A Feminist Ontology for the Digital Age

Margaret Schwartz

4 Digital Unworld(s): The Bielefeld Conspiracy

Yvette Granata

　

PART II: Being Human: Extension, Exposure and Ethics

5 You Have Been Tagged: Magical Incantations, Digital Incarnations and Extended Selves

Paul Frosh

6 Surveillance, Sensors, and Knowledge through the Machine

Sun-ha Hong

7 Social Media and the Care of the Self

Ganaele Langlois

8 The Ethics of Digital Being: Vulnerability, Invulnerability, and ‘Dangerous Surprises’

Vincent Miller

　

PART III: Transcendence: Beyond Life, Death and the Human

9 The Internet is Always Awake: Sensations, Sounds and Silences of the Digital Grave

Amanda Lagerkvist

10 Digital Rituals and the Quest for Existential Security

Johanna Sumiala

11 Cybernetic Animism: Non-Human Personhood and the Internet

Devin Proctor

12 Death in Life and Life in Death: Forms and Fates of the Human

Connor Graham and Alfred Montoya

Afterword

Charles M. Ess